doc/cytoscape/index.rst, before:

.. -*- coding: utf-8 -*-

============================
Cluster ONE Cytoscape plugin
============================

:Author: Tamás Nepusz, Alberto Paccanaro
:Contact: tamas@cs.rhul.ac.uk

If you use results calculated by Cluster ONE in a publication,
please cite one of the suggested `references`_ (see below).

Introduction
============
.. contents:: Table of contents
   :backlinks: none

The one-minute guide to using Cluster ONE
=========================================

TODO

Description of the algorithm
============================

Cluster ONE strives to discover densely connected and possibly overlapping
regions within the Cytoscape network you are working with. The interpretation
of these regions depends on the context (i.e. what the network represents) and
it is left up to you. For instance, in protein-protein interaction networks
derived from high-throughput AP-MS experiments, these dense regions usually
correspond to protein complexes or fractions of them. Cluster ONE works by
"growing" dense regions out of small seeds (typically one or two vertices),
driven by a quality function called *cohesiveness*.

.. |V0| replace:: V\ :sub:`0`

Before we move on to the formal definition of cohesiveness, let us introduce
some terminology that classifies vertices and edges of a graph *G* according to
their relationship to a selected group of vertices |V0|. Vertices of |V0| are
called *internal vertices*, while vertices not in |V0| are called *external
vertices*.  An edge that is situated between two internal vertices is an
*internal edge*, an edge going between an internal and an external vertex is a
*boundary edge*, and an edge between two external vertices is an *external
edge*. An internal vertex adjacent to at least one boundary edge is an
*internal boundary vertex*, while an external vertex adjacent to at least one
boundary edge is an *external boundary vertex*. The following figure illustrates
these concepts:

.. image:: images/cohesive_subgroup.png

Here, |V0| itself is denoted by a shaded background, which delimits internal
and external vertices. Thick black edges are internal, thin black edges are
boundary edges, while thin gray dashed edges are completely external. Vertices
marked by a letter are (internal or external) boundary vertices.

The quality of the group can be assessed by the number of internal edges
divided by the sum of the number of internal and boundary edges. This quality
measure is driven by the fact that a well-defined group should have many
internal edges and only a few boundary edges; in other words, the boundary
of the group should be sharp. If the edges have weights (i.e. a numeric value
assigned to each edge that quantifies how reliable that edge is or how confident
we are in its existence), the same guidelines apply, but the number of edges
should be replaced by the total confidence associated to those edges. Whenever
you have such confidence values, store them in a numeric edge attribute in
Cytoscape and use that attribute to drive the cluster growth process. From now
on, such confidence values will simply be called *edge weights* and the above
mentioned quality measure will be referred to as *cohesiveness*.

Cluster ONE essentially looks for groups of high cohesiveness. This is achieved
by adopting a greedy strategy: starting from a single seed vertex (or a small
set of vertices that are strongly bound together), one can extend the group
step by step with new vertices so that the newly added vertex always increases
the cohesiveness of a group as much as possible. Removals are also allowed if
removing a vertex from the group increases its cohesiveness. The process stops
when it is not possible to increase the cohesiveness of the group by adding
another external boundary vertex or removing an internal boundary vertex.  See
the Cluster ONE paper [1]_ for the description of the exact procedure.  The
growth process is repeated either for every vertex or every connected vertex
pair to obtain an initial set of cohesive subgroups. Subgroups smaller than a
given size or having a density less than a given threshold are thrown away.
Finally, redundant cohesive subgroups (i.e. those that overlap significantly
with each other) are merged to form larger subgroups to make the results easier
to interpret.


The Cluster ONE menu
====================

Cluster ONE installs itself into the Plugins menu of Cytoscape under
a submenu named Cluster ONE. This submenu has the following items:

**Start**
    Shows the `control panel`_ of Cluster ONE, which is the main entry
    point to the clustering algorithm implemented in Cluster ONE.

**Grow cluster from selected nodes**
    Grows a single cluster according to the steps of the Cluster ONE algorithm,
    starting from the selected nodes which will be treated as a single seed set.
    For more details about the growth process, please refer to the
    `description of the algorithm`. The resulting cluster will be selected
    after the growth process is finished. Since the original selection will
    be lost, you might consider using the **NamedSelection** Cytoscape
    plugin (available from Plugins -> Manage plugins) to remember the
    original selection.

    This menu item remains disabled until you start the Cluster ONE plugin
    using the corresponding menu item.

**Color nodes by affinity**
    Colors the nodes of the network according to their affinity to the
    currently selected set of nodes as a cluster. Nodes with a positive
    affinity to the cluster will be colored red, negative affinities will
    be shown using shades of blue. The affinity of a node tells us how much
    would the addition of that node increase the quality of the cluster.
    You can use this menu item to drive the cluster growth process manually
    by starting from a small seed cluster and repeatedly adding nodes to
    the cluster that increase the quality function the most. Note that
    you will have to recalculate the affinities every time you modify the
    cluster, Cluster ONE won't do that automatically.

    Node coloring is implemented using a custom VizMapper style. This style
    is selected automatically when you click on this menu item, but you can
    always return to your original style in the VizMapper panel of Cytoscape.

    This menu item remains disabled until you start the Cluster ONE plugin
    using the corresponding menu item.

**Help**
    Shows the manual of Cluster ONE (this document) in a separate window.

**About**
    Shows the authors, the preferred citation for Cluster ONE
    (see also `References`_) and the URL of its homepage.


Control panel
=============

The control panel of Cluster ONE is to be found on a separate tab in the
control panel of Cytoscape (see the left hand side of the Cytoscape user
interface). The panel consists of two large parts: the `Parameters`_ box lets
you set the parameters of the algorithm, while the `Selection info`_ box lets
you examine some properties of the currently selected set of nodes (such as the
total weight of edges within the set and at the boundary of the set, or the
value of the Cluster ONE quality function).

Click on the **Generate clusters** button at the bottom of the panel to start
the clustering process. The `result viewer`_ will open automatically when the
results are ready. Use the **Close panel** button to hide the Cluster ONE
control panel.

After a successful clustering process, the nodes of the network will be colored
according to the number of clusters they participate in. Nodes that correspond
to a single cluster only will turn red, nodes with multiple clusters will turn
yellow. Gray nodes denote outliers (nodes that did not end up in any of the
clusters).  This coloring is implemented using a custom VizMapper style. The
style is selected automatically when the clustering process finishes, but you
can always return to your original style in the VizMapper panel of Cytoscape.


Parameters
----------

**Minimum size**
    The minimum size of clusters deemed relevant by Cluster ONE.
    This is a hard threshold: whenever Cluster ONE finds a cluster
    smaller than the minimum size, the cluster will be discarded
    immediately.

**Minimum density**
    The minimum density of clusters deemed relevant by Cluster ONE.
    The density of a cluster is the total sum of edge weights within
    the cluster, divided by the number of theoretically possible
    edges within the cluster. In other words, this is the average edge
    weight within the cluster if missing edges are assumed to have a
    weight of zero. Whenever Cluster ONE finds a cluster that has a
    smaller density than the value given here, the cluster will be
    discarded immediately. Increase the minimum density if you get
    too many clusters and they seem too sparse, or decrease it if you
    are not getting enough clusters.

**Merging method** and **Overlap threshold**
    After an initial set of clusters are found, Cluster ONE tries to
    merge highly overlapping (and thus redundant) clusters in order to
    clean up the result. For each pair of clusters found, Cluster ONE
    calculates a score that quantifies the overlap between them, and
    two clusters are merged if this overlap is larger than a given
    threshold (specified by the **Overlap threshold** textbox). There
    are two different ways to calculate the overlap score:

        - The *match coefficient* takes the size of the overlap squared,
          divided by the product of the sizes of the two clusters being
          considered, as in the paper of Bader and Hogue [2]_.

        - The *meet/min coefficient* divides the size of the overlap
          by the size of the smaller cluster.

    The default settings (match coefficient with a threshold of 0.8)
    seem to be satisfactory for most use-cases. Decreasing the threshold
    will result in more clusters being merged.

**Seeding method**
    Cluster ONE works by growing clusters from initial "seeds", driven
    by a goal function that is maximized greedily (see the Cluster
    ONE paper [1]_ for more details). A seed can be an arbitrary subgraph,
    but in most cases, it is either a single node or a single edge.
    The seeding method prescribes how the seeds are selected during the
    calculation:

        - *From every node* means that every node will be used as a seed.

        - *From unused nodes* means that nodes will be tried in the
          descending order of their weights (where the weight of a node is
          the sum of the weights on its adjacent edges), and whenever a
          cluster is found, the nodes in that cluster will be excluded from
          the list of potential seeds. In other words, the node with the
          largest weight that does *not* participate in any of the clusters
          found so far will be selected as the next seed.

        - *From every edge* means that every edge will be considered once,
          each yielding a seed consisting of the two endpoints of the edge.

    In practical use-cases, the *From unused nodes* and *From every node*
    methods are almost equivalent, but the former one yields a smaller
    number of redundant clusters.

**Edge weights**
    A numeric edge attribute to be used for the edge weights. *[unweighted]*
    means that each edge will have a weight equal to 1. If you don't see the
    name of the attribute in the list, click on the **Refresh** button
    (|refresh|) next to the combo box to re-scan the network for numeric edge
    attributes. This is necessary when you added the edge attribute you are
    looking for after you opened the Cluster ONE control panel.

.. |refresh| image:: images/refresh.png


Selection info
--------------

The quantities shown in this box always correspond to the currently selected
set of nodes in the current Cytoscape view.


**Number of nodes**
    The number of nodes in the cluster.

**In-weight**
    The sum of the weights of the edges that lie completely within the cluster.

**Out-weight**
    The sum of the weights of the edges where one endpoint lies within the cluster
    and the other lies outside.

**Density**
    The density of the cluster; that is, the sum of the edge weights within
    the cluster divided by the number of theoretically possible edges.

**Quality**
    The quality of the cluster, as measured by the in-weight divided by the
    sum of the in-weight and the out-weight. The rationale behind this measure
    is that a good cluster contains many heavyweight edges within the cluster
    itself, and it is connected to the rest of the network only by a few lightweight
    edges.

**P-value**
    The p-value of a one-sided Mann-Whitney U test performed on the in-weights
    and out-weights of the vertices. A low p-value means that the in-weights
    are significantly larger than the out-weights, so it is more likely that the
    cluster is a valid finding and not the result of random fluctuations.
    Color codes also help distinguishing significant results from insignificant
    ones: p-values less than 0.05 are denoted by red colors and p-values
    between 0.05 and 0.1 are shown in yellow.

Note that the Mann-Whitney U test cannot be performed sensibly when all the
in-weights and out-weights are equal. In this case, the p-value will show "NA".


Result viewer
=============

The result viewer appears on the right hand side of the Cytoscape user
interface after a successful clustering process and it can operate in two
modes: the `simple view`_ and the `detailed view`_. When the result viewer is
opened for the first time, the `simple view`_ is used, which shows each cluster
in a scrollable list box along with some basic properties of the cluster
(number of nodes, density, quality and p-value). The clusters are ordered
according to ascending p-values.  There is also a small `toolbar`_ above the list
of clusters, where the number of clusters are shown along with small push
buttons to access some of the functionality provided by the result viewer.

Simple view
-----------

The simple view uses two columns, the first column showing a schematic drawing of
each cluster (driven by a simple force-directed layout algorithm) and the second
showing some basic properties of the cluster. The clusters are drawn in the
background, so if there are many large clusters, you may have to wait a little bit
until you are able to see them all.

Right-clicking on any row of the table will bring up the `cluster context menu`_.
Double-clicking on any row will extract the cluster into a separate Cytoscape
network view.

Detailed view
-------------

The detailed view can be turned on or off by clicking on the first button of
the toolbar which shows a table (|details|). It is advised to turn the detailed
view on only if the result panel itself is detached from the main Cytoscape
window or if it is wide enough, as the detailed view contains seven columns,
the first showing a schematic drawing of the cluster itself, while the remaining
six correspond to the properties seen earlier in the `selection info`_ box
on the `control panel`_ (number of nodes, density, in-weight, out-weight,
quality and p-value).

In the detailed view, you can sort the clusters according to any of the above
columns by clicking on the column header. Clicking on the header again reverses
the order.

Right-clicking on any row of the table will bring up the `cluster context menu`_.
Double-clicking on any row will extract the cluster into a separate Cytoscape
network view.


Toolbar
-------

|details| **Switch to detailed view**
    This button toggles between the `simple view`_ and the `detailed view`_.

|find| **Find clusters of selected nodes**
    By clicking this button, Cluster ONE will evaluate all the nodes that are
    selected in the current Cytoscape network and select the clusters in which
    at least one of the selected nodes participate. It can primarily be used
    to find the cluster(s) of a single node after selecting that node in the
    main Cytoscape panel.

|save| **Save clustering**
    Saves the clustering to disk in a file where each row corresponds to a
    single cluster. The IDs of the nodes in a cluster are separated by
    space in each line.

|close| **Close result**
    Closes the result set (i.e. removes its tab from the Results panel of
    Cytoscape).

.. |details| image:: images/details.png
.. |find|    image:: images/find.png
.. |save|    image:: images/save.png
.. |close|   image:: images/close.png


Cluster context menu
--------------------

This menu pops up whenever you right-click on a row in the results panel.
If there are multiple rows selected in the result set, the operations will
apply to all of them, otherwise they will apply to only the one you have
clicked on.

**Copy to clipboard**
    This menu item copies the IDs of the nodes in the selected clusters to
    the clipboard. If there are multiple clusters selected, one line
    in the copied text will correspond to one cluster. After copying,
    you can paste the IDs to a text editor or a word processor.

**Extract selected cluster(s)**
    Creates a new Cytoscape network from the subnetwork spanned by the
    nodes in the selected clusters. Even when multiple clusters are
    selected, only a single Cytoscape network will be created that includes
    all the nodes in all the selected clusters. This command can also
    be invoked for a single cluster by double-clicking on the cluster
    in the result list.

**Save selected cluster(s)**
    Saves the selected clusters into a text file in a similar format
    as the one generated by the **Copy to clipboard** operation (one
    cluster per line, node IDs separated by spaces).


References
==========

If you use results calculated by Cluster ONE in a publication,
please cite the following reference:

.. [1] Nepusz T, Yu H, Paccanaro A: Detecting overlapping protein complexes
       in protein-protein interaction networks. In preparation.

Some other papers that might be of interest (and were referenced earlier
in this help file):

.. [2] Bader GD, Hogue CWV: An automated method for finding molecular complexes
       in large protein interaction networks. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:2.
       doi:10.1186/1471-2105-4-2

Commit message:

added logo, tidied up about box

doc/cytoscape/index.rst, after:

.. -*- coding: utf-8 -*-

============================
Cluster ONE Cytoscape plugin
============================

:Author: Tamás Nepusz, Haiyuan Yu, Alberto Paccanaro
:Contact: tamas@cs.rhul.ac.uk

Introduction
============

.. image:: images/logo.png
   :width: 270
   :height: 84
   :alt: Cluster ONE logo
   :align: center

This is the documentation of the Cluster ONE Cytoscape plugin,
created by Tamás Nepusz, Haiyuan Yu and Alberto Paccanaro.

If you use results calculated by Cluster ONE in a publication,
please cite one of the suggested `references`_.


.. contents:: Table of contents
   :backlinks: none

The one-minute guide to using Cluster ONE
=========================================

TODO

Description of the algorithm
============================

Cluster ONE strives to discover densely connected and possibly overlapping
regions within the Cytoscape network you are working with. The interpretation
of these regions depends on the context (i.e. what the network represents) and
it is left up to you. For instance, in protein-protein interaction networks
derived from high-throughput AP-MS experiments, these dense regions usually
correspond to protein complexes or fractions of them. Cluster ONE works by
"growing" dense regions out of small seeds (typically one or two vertices),
driven by a quality function called *cohesiveness*.

.. |V0| replace:: V\ :sub:`0`

Before we move on to the formal definition of cohesiveness, let us introduce
some terminology that classifies vertices and edges of a graph *G* according to
their relationship to a selected group of vertices |V0|. Vertices of |V0| are
called *internal vertices*, while vertices not in |V0| are called *external
vertices*.  An edge that is situated between two internal vertices is an
*internal edge*, an edge going between an internal and an external vertex is a
*boundary edge*, and an edge between two external vertices is an *external
edge*. An internal vertex adjacent to at least one boundary edge is an
*internal boundary vertex*, while an external vertex adjacent to at least one
boundary edge is an *external boundary vertex*. The following figure illustrates
these concepts:

.. image:: images/cohesive_subgroup.png

Here, |V0| itself is denoted by a shaded background, which delimits internal
and external vertices. Thick black edges are internal, thin black edges are
boundary edges, while thin gray dashed edges are completely external. Vertices
marked by a letter are (internal or external) boundary vertices.

The quality of the group can be assessed by the number of internal edges
divided by the sum of the number of internal and boundary edges. This quality
measure is driven by the fact that a well-defined group should have many
internal edges and only a few boundary edges; in other words, the boundary
of the group should be sharp. If the edges have weights (i.e. a numeric value
assigned to each edge that quantifies how reliable that edge is or how confident
we are in its existence), the same guidelines apply, but the number of edges
should be replaced by the total confidence associated to those edges. Whenever
you have such confidence values, store them in a numeric edge attribute in
Cytoscape and use that attribute to drive the cluster growth process. From now
on, such confidence values will simply be called *edge weights* and the above
mentioned quality measure will be referred to as *cohesiveness*.

Cluster ONE essentially looks for groups of high cohesiveness. This is achieved
by adopting a greedy strategy: starting from a single seed vertex (or a small
set of vertices that are strongly bound together), one can extend the group
step by step with new vertices so that the newly added vertex always increases
the cohesiveness of a group as much as possible. Removals are also allowed if
removing a vertex from the group increases its cohesiveness. The process stops
when it is not possible to increase the cohesiveness of the group by adding
another external boundary vertex or removing an internal boundary vertex.  See
the Cluster ONE paper [1]_ for the description of the exact procedure.  The
growth process is repeated either for every vertex or every connected vertex
pair to obtain an initial set of cohesive subgroups. Subgroups smaller than a
given size or having a density less than a given threshold are thrown away.
Finally, redundant cohesive subgroups (i.e. those that overlap significantly
with each other) are merged to form larger subgroups to make the results easier
to interpret.


The Cluster ONE menu
====================

Cluster ONE installs itself into the Plugins menu of Cytoscape under
a submenu named Cluster ONE. This submenu has the following items:

**Start**
    Shows the `control panel`_ of Cluster ONE, which is the main entry
    point to the clustering algorithm implemented in Cluster ONE.

**Grow cluster from selected nodes**
    Grows a single cluster according to the steps of the Cluster ONE algorithm,
    starting from the selected nodes which will be treated as a single seed set.
    For more details about the growth process, please refer to the
    `description of the algorithm`. The resulting cluster will be selected
    after the growth process is finished. Since the original selection will
    be lost, you might consider using the **NamedSelection** Cytoscape
    plugin (available from Plugins -> Manage plugins) to remember the
    original selection.

    This menu item remains disabled until you start the Cluster ONE plugin
    using the corresponding menu item.

**Color nodes by affinity**
    Colors the nodes of the network according to their affinity to the
    currently selected set of nodes as a cluster. Nodes with a positive
    affinity to the cluster will be colored red, negative affinities will
    be shown using shades of blue. The affinity of a node tells us how much
    would the addition of that node increase the quality of the cluster.
    You can use this menu item to drive the cluster growth process manually
    by starting from a small seed cluster and repeatedly adding nodes to
    the cluster that increase the quality function the most. Note that
    you will have to recalculate the affinities every time you modify the
    cluster, Cluster ONE won't do that automatically.

    Node coloring is implemented using a custom VizMapper style. This style
    is selected automatically when you click on this menu item, but you can
    always return to your original style in the VizMapper panel of Cytoscape.

    This menu item remains disabled until you start the Cluster ONE plugin
    using the corresponding menu item.

**Help**
    Shows the manual of Cluster ONE (this document) in a separate window.

**About**
    Shows the authors, the preferred citation for Cluster ONE
    (see also `References`_) and the URL of its homepage.


Control panel
=============

The control panel of Cluster ONE is to be found on a separate tab in the
control panel of Cytoscape (see the left hand side of the Cytoscape user
interface). The panel consists of two large parts: the `Parameters`_ box lets
you set the parameters of the algorithm, while the `Selection info`_ box lets
you examine some properties of the currently selected set of nodes (such as the
total weight of edges within the set and at the boundary of the set, or the
value of the Cluster ONE quality function).

Click on the **Generate clusters** button at the bottom of the panel to start
the clustering process. The `result viewer`_ will open automatically when the
results are ready. Use the **Close panel** button to hide the Cluster ONE
control panel.

After a successful clustering process, the nodes of the network will be colored
according to the number of clusters they participate in. Nodes that correspond
to a single cluster only will turn red, nodes with multiple clusters will turn
yellow. Gray nodes denote outliers (nodes that did not end up in any of the
clusters).  This coloring is implemented using a custom VizMapper style. The
style is selected automatically when the clustering process finishes, but you
can always return to your original style in the VizMapper panel of Cytoscape.


Parameters
----------

**Minimum size**
    The minimum size of clusters deemed relevant by Cluster ONE.
    This is a hard threshold: whenever Cluster ONE finds a cluster
    smaller than the minimum size, the cluster will be discarded
    immediately.

**Minimum density**
    The minimum density of clusters deemed relevant by Cluster ONE.
    The density of a cluster is the total sum of edge weights within
    the cluster, divided by the number of theoretically possible
    edges within the cluster. In other words, this is the average edge
    weight within the cluster if missing edges are assumed to have a
    weight of zero. Whenever Cluster ONE finds a cluster that has a
    smaller density than the value given here, the cluster will be
    discarded immediately. Increase the minimum density if you get
    too many clusters and they seem too sparse, or decrease it if you
    are not getting enough clusters.

**Merging method** and **Overlap threshold**
    After an initial set of clusters are found, Cluster ONE tries to
    merge highly overlapping (and thus redundant) clusters in order to
    clean up the result. For each pair of clusters found, Cluster ONE
    calculates a score that quantifies the overlap between them, and
    two clusters are merged if this overlap is larger than a given
    threshold (specified by the **Overlap threshold** textbox). There
    are two different ways to calculate the overlap score:

        - The *match coefficient* takes the size of the overlap squared,
          divided by the product of the sizes of the two clusters being
          considered, as in the paper of Bader and Hogue [2]_.

        - The *meet/min coefficient* divides the size of the overlap
          by the size of the smaller cluster.

    The default settings (match coefficient with a threshold of 0.8)
    seem to be satisfactory for most use-cases. Decreasing the threshold
    will result in more clusters being merged.

**Seeding method**
    Cluster ONE works by growing clusters from initial "seeds", driven
    by a goal function that is maximized greedily (see the Cluster
    ONE paper [1]_ for more details). A seed can be an arbitrary subgraph,
    but in most cases, it is either a single node or a single edge.
    The seeding method prescribes how the seeds are selected during the
    calculation:

        - *From every node* means that every node will be used as a seed.

        - *From unused nodes* means that nodes will be tried in the
          descending order of their weights (where the weight of a node is
          the sum of the weights on its adjacent edges), and whenever a
          cluster is found, the nodes in that cluster will be excluded from
          the list of potential seeds. In other words, the node with the
          largest weight that does *not* participate in any of the clusters
          found so far will be selected as the next seed.

        - *From every edge* means that every edge will be considered once,
          each yielding a seed consisting of the two endpoints of the edge.

    In practical use-cases, the *From unused nodes* and *From every node*
    methods are almost equivalent, but the former one yields a smaller
    number of redundant clusters.

**Edge weights**
    A numeric edge attribute to be used for the edge weights. *[unweighted]*
    means that each edge will have a weight equal to 1. If you don't see the
    name of the attribute in the list, click on the **Refresh** button
    (|refresh|) next to the combo box to re-scan the network for numeric edge
    attributes. This is necessary when you added the edge attribute you are
    looking for after you opened the Cluster ONE control panel.

.. |refresh| image:: images/refresh.png


Selection info
--------------

The quantities shown in this box always correspond to the currently selected
set of nodes in the current Cytoscape view.


**Number of nodes**
    The number of nodes in the cluster.

**In-weight**
    The sum of the weights of the edges that lie completely within the cluster.

**Out-weight**
    The sum of the weights of the edges where one endpoint lies within the cluster
    and the other lies outside.

**Density**
    The density of the cluster; that is, the sum of the edge weights within
    the cluster divided by the number of theoretically possible edges.

**Quality**
    The quality of the cluster, as measured by the in-weight divided by the
    sum of the in-weight and the out-weight. The rationale behind this measure
    is that a good cluster contains many heavyweight edges within the cluster
    itself, and it is connected to the rest of the network only by a few lightweight
    edges.

**P-value**
    The p-value of a one-sided Mann-Whitney U test performed on the in-weights
    and out-weights of the vertices. A low p-value means that the in-weights
    are significantly larger than the out-weights, so it is more likely that the
    cluster is a valid finding and not the result of random fluctuations.
    Color codes also help distinguishing significant results from insignificant
    ones: p-values less than 0.05 are denoted by red colors and p-values
    between 0.05 and 0.1 are shown in yellow.

Note that the Mann-Whitney U test cannot be performed sensibly when all the
in-weights and out-weights are equal. In this case, the p-value will show "NA".


Result viewer
=============

The result viewer appears on the right hand side of the Cytoscape user
interface after a successful clustering process and it can operate in two
modes: the `simple view`_ and the `detailed view`_. When the result viewer is
opened for the first time, the `simple view`_ is used, which shows each cluster
in a scrollable list box along with some basic properties of the cluster
(number of nodes, density, quality and p-value). The clusters are ordered
according to ascending p-values.  There is also a small `toolbar`_ above the list
of clusters, where the number of clusters are shown along with small push
buttons to access some of the functionality provided by the result viewer.

Simple view
-----------

The simple view uses two columns, the first column showing a schematic drawing of
each cluster (driven by a simple force-directed layout algorithm) and the second
showing some basic properties of the cluster. The clusters are drawn in the
background, so if there are many large clusters, you may have to wait a little bit
until you are able to see them all.

Right-clicking on any row of the table will bring up the `cluster context menu`_.
Double-clicking on any row will extract the cluster into a separate Cytoscape
network view.

Detailed view
-------------

The detailed view can be turned on or off by clicking on the first button of
the toolbar which shows a table (|details|). It is advised to turn the detailed
view on only if the result panel itself is detached from the main Cytoscape
window or if it is wide enough, as the detailed view contains seven columns,
the first showing a schematic drawing of the cluster itself, while the remaining
six correspond to the properties seen earlier in the `selection info`_ box
on the `control panel`_ (number of nodes, density, in-weight, out-weight,
quality and p-value).

In the detailed view, you can sort the clusters according to any of the above
columns by clicking on the column header. Clicking on the header again reverses
the order.

Right-clicking on any row of the table will bring up the `cluster context menu`_.
Double-clicking on any row will extract the cluster into a separate Cytoscape
network view.


Toolbar
-------

|details| **Switch to detailed view**
    This button toggles between the `simple view`_ and the `detailed view`_.

|find| **Find clusters of selected nodes**
    By clicking this button, Cluster ONE will evaluate all the nodes that are
    selected in the current Cytoscape network and select the clusters in which
    at least one of the selected nodes participate. It can primarily be used
    to find the cluster(s) of a single node after selecting that node in the
    main Cytoscape panel.

|save| **Save clustering**
    Saves the clustering to disk in a file where each row corresponds to a
    single cluster. The IDs of the nodes in a cluster are separated by
    space in each line.

|close| **Close result**
    Closes the result set (i.e. removes its tab from the Results panel of
    Cytoscape).

.. |details| image:: images/details.png
.. |find|    image:: images/find.png
.. |save|    image:: images/save.png
.. |close|   image:: images/close.png


Cluster context menu
--------------------

This menu pops up whenever you right-click on a row in the results panel.
If there are multiple rows selected in the result set, the operations will
apply to all of them, otherwise they will apply to only the one you have
clicked on.

**Copy to clipboard**
    This menu item copies the IDs of the nodes in the selected clusters to
    the clipboard. If there are multiple clusters selected, one line
    in the copied text will correspond to one cluster. After copying,
    you can paste the IDs to a text editor or a word processor.

**Extract selected cluster(s)**
    Creates a new Cytoscape network from the subnetwork spanned by the
    nodes in the selected clusters. Even when multiple clusters are
    selected, only a single Cytoscape network will be created that includes
    all the nodes in all the selected clusters. This command can also
    be invoked for a single cluster by double-clicking on the cluster
    in the result list.

**Save selected cluster(s)**
    Saves the selected clusters into a text file in a similar format
    as the one generated by the **Copy to clipboard** operation (one
    cluster per line, node IDs separated by spaces).


References
==========

If you use results calculated by Cluster ONE in a publication,
please cite the following reference:

.. [1] Nepusz T, Yu H, Paccanaro A: Detecting overlapping protein complexes
       in protein-protein interaction networks. In preparation.

Some other papers that might be of interest (and were referenced earlier
in this help file):

.. [2] Bader GD, Hogue CWV: An automated method for finding molecular complexes
       in large protein interaction networks. BMC Bioinformatics 2003, 4:2.
       doi:10.1186/1471-2105-4-2
